#summary A step-by-step breakdown for creating an analysis in Crystal.
#labels Phase-Support,Featured

= Introduction =

Getting a Crystal analysis going can seem daunting, but it's actually quite easy. The wiki covers lots of topics; this page provides some high-level guidance and checkpoints to make sure things worked out ok.

Instructors can use each step as a checkpoint to make sure that students aren't lost, or students can follow this themselves to prevent silly mistakes.

= 1. Install Crystal =
*Reading and instruction:* [Installation]

*Verification:* You should see a "Crystal" menu in Eclipse.

= 2. Register your analysis =
*Reading and instruction:* [GettingStarted] (don't bother with the ASTVisitor yet, just get an ICrystalAnalysis registered).

*Verification:* Start a child Eclipse. Your analysis name will appear under the Crystal menu.

= 3. Create a visitor = 
*Reading and instruction:* [GettingStarted] (now make a visitor too!)
Verification: Start the child Eclipse and run your analysis.

= 4. Create a flow analysis = 
*Reading and instruction:* [DataflowAnalysis] (don't override any transfer functions, but get everything put together and have the visitor call to the flow analysis.)

*Verification:* Start the child Eclipse and run your analysis. It will give the same results as for the above step, since your flow analysis isn't transferring yet.

= 5. Start making those transfer functions smart! =
*Reading and instruction:* [DataflowAnalysis] (add in those transfer functions now)

*Verification:* Start the child Eclipse, you should now have a smarter analysis!

Throughout this process, we suggest working on one transfer function at a time to incrementally make your analysis better.

= Advanced topics = 
At this point, instructors might suggest students can use other features of Crystal to make their analysis smarter. (There are plenty of possibilities for extra credit here!) Some possibilities are:

[CrystalAnnotations Use specifications (in form of Java annotations)]

[BranchSensitivity Use a branch sensitive analysis]